feat: go plugin documentation (#79)
wundergraph/cosmo-docs: docs/router/plugins.mdx

  <Card title="Simplified Deployment" icon="cloud-arrow-up">
    Fewer moving parts means simpler deployments and maintenance with all subgraphs running in the router process
  </Card>
  <Card title="Reduced Infrastructure Costs" icon="dollar-sign">
    Consolidate services to reduce overall resource consumption and operational complexity
  </Card>
  <Card title="Direct API Bridging" icon="bridge">
    Easily connect legacy REST APIs, databases, and other services to your graph without building standalone GraphQL services
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

This architecture gives you a unified development experience with consistent tooling across all your subgraphs while enabling seamless integration with your existing infrastructure.

## How It Works

The gRPC plugin architecture works by:

1. **Plugin Registration**: Plugins are registered with the Cosmo Router at startup
2. **Schema Integration**: The plugin's schema is integrated into the federated graph
3. **Request Handling**: When the router receives a GraphQL request, it routes relevant parts to the appropriate plugins
4. **Cross-Process Communication**: Plugins run in separate processes and communicate with the router via gRPC

> 5. **Response Assembly**: The router assembles the complete response from all resolvers

Reviewer: I would change it to something like "The plugin will be used by the router to fulfill the information it provides". As it is now, it sounds like it is unrelated to the plugin architecture...

wgc plugin build ./plugins/users

# Test the plugin. Every boilerplate plugin should have a test file.
wgc plugin test ./plugins/users
```

Next, you need to define your `graph.yaml` file that references your plugin:

```yaml graph.yaml
version: 1
subgraphs:
  - name: products
    routing_url: http://localhost:3011/graphql
    schema:
      file: ../subgraphs/products/schema.graphql
  - name: users
    plugin:
      version: 0.0.1
      path: plugins/users
```

In this example:
- A traditional "products" subgraph is referenced by its URL and schema file
- The "users" subgraph is implemented as a plugin, referencing the path to the built plugin

Next, you need to create the router execution config:

```bash
wgc router compose -i graph.yaml -o config.json
```

Once composed, you can configure your router to use the plugin and execution config in your `config.yaml`:

```yaml config.yaml
execution_config:
  file:
    # The path to the execution configuration file
    # This file is generated by the `wgc router compose` command
    path: ./config.json

plugins:
  enabled: true
  path: "plugins" # The path to the plugins directory
```

> ### Plugin Directory Structure

Reviewer: I would just link to the cli plugin init page, to avoid the duplicate content...

    ├── README.md                     # Documentation and getting started guide
    ├── go.mod                        # Go module definition
    ├── src/                          # Source code for your plugin
    │   ├── schema.graphql            # GraphQL schema defining your subgraph
    │   ├── main.go                   # Main implementation file for your plugin
    │   └── main_test.go              # Test file for your plugin
    └── generated/                    # Generated files, do not edit
        ├── mapping.json              # GraphQL to gRPC mapping
        ├── service.proto             # Protocol Buffers definition
        └── service.proto.lock.json   # Lock file for Proto generation
```

For more details on the directory structure and build process, see the [`wgc plugin init`](/cli/plugin/init) documentation.

## Conclusion

gRPC plugins for the Cosmo Router provide a powerful way to implement high-performance subgraphs that communicate with the router via a secure cross-process architecture. By leveraging the battle-tested HashiCorp go-plugin framework while maintaining clean separation of concerns, they offer the best of both worlds for many use cases.

> For complex systems, consider a hybrid approach: use gRPC plugins for performance-critical paths and traditional subgraphs for areas that require independent scaling or deployment.

Reviewer: I would add a paragraph dedicated to the Deployment of the router when there are also plugins involved. Like the build and production environment should be the same, etc...

Author: Good point. Please check.

## Motivation

The biggest pain point in adopting GraphQL isn't GraphQL itself it's the steep learning curve and fragmented subgraph tooling across languages and platforms.

<CardGroup cols={1}>
  <Card title="Simplify GraphQL Implementation" icon="wand-magic-sparkles">
    While everyone understands the value of "one schema, one query," building and maintaining production-grade subgraphs across diverse environments remains challenging. Spec support, runtime performance, and type safety depend on your subgraph framework quality.
  </Card>

  <Card title="Design with GraphQL, Implement with gRPC" icon="code">
    Our approach combines GraphQL's schema-first flexibility with gRPC's performance and reliability. Using the same plugin system that powers HashiCorp Vault and Terraform, you can develop subgraphs in any language and run them directly in the Cosmo Router.
  </Card>

  <Card title="Proto-Based Code Generation" icon="bolt">

>     The strict typing and automatic code generation from Protocol Buffers (proto) definitions provides an immense productivity boost, especially in the era of generative AI. The generated proto-based gRPC code creates a strongly-typed foundation that AI tools can more effectively understand, extend, and modify, reducing development time and errors while ensuring consistent API implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Strict typing and automatic code generation provided by Protocol Buffers provide a boost to productivity, especially in the age of generative AI. The generated code is strictly typed, concise and simple, making it easy for human and robot developers alike to understand and extend,reducing development time and errors while ensuring consistent API implementation.
```

  </Card>
</CardGroup>

### Benefits Over Traditional Subgraphs

When compared to traditional standalone subgraphs, gRPC plugins offer substantial technical advantages:

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Simplified Architecture" icon="cloud-arrow-up">

>     Maintain fewer components with unified deployment and monitoring. You can run multiple plugins by the same router

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Maintain fewer components with unified deployment and monitoring. You can run multiple plugins on the same router.
```

  </Card>
  <Card title="Performance" icon="rocket">

>     Achieve significantly lower latency with direct RPC-based communication. The GraphQL framework overhead is eliminated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Achieve significantly lower latency with direct gRPC-based communication. The network and GraphQL framework overhead is eliminated.
```

  </Card>
  <Card title="Enhanced Developer Experience" icon="code">
    Work with consistent tooling and deployment patterns across all subgraphs. If your team knows how to work with gRPC, they know how to build subgraphs.
  </Card>
  <Card title="Seamless Integration" icon="bridge">

>     Connect to legacy systems, databases, and APIs without intermediate GraphQL services. The plugin can be written in any language that supports gRPC.

Reviewer 2: This is conflicting with below "**Language Support**: Currently, only Go is supported for plugin development"

## How It Works

The gRPC plugin architecture works by:

1. **Plugin Registration**: Plugins are registered with the Cosmo Router at startup
2. **Schema Integration**: The plugin's schema is integrated into the federated graph
3. **Request Handling**: When the router receives a GraphQL request, it routes relevant parts to the appropriate plugins
4. **Inter-Process Communication**: Plugins run in separate processes and communicate with the router via gRPC
5. **Response Assembly**: The router assembles the complete response from all plugins and regular subgraphs

## Limitations

While powerful, gRPC plugins have some considerations:

- **Language Support**: Currently, only Go is supported for plugin development
- **Deployment Coupling**: Plugins must be deployed with the router rather than independently

## Bootstrapping a gRPC Plugin

Cosmo provides a set of CLI tools to simplify the process of creating, building, and testing gRPC plugins. These tools handle much of the boilerplate code generation and build process for you.

### Prerequisites

Before using the plugin CLI tools, make sure you have:
- [WunderGraph Cosmo CLI](/cli) installed

> - The go compiler, protobuf compiler, and protoc plugins are installed automatically by the CLI. However, you can install them manually if you prefer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The Go compiler, protobuf compiler, and protoc plugins are installed automatically by the CLI. However, you can install them manually if you prefer.
```

      <div className="text-sm">Check out our <a href="https://github.com/wundergraph/cosmo-plugin-demo" target="_blank" rel="noopener">cosmo-plugin-demo</a> repository for a working example of gRPC plugins in action.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</Frame>

## What are gRPC Plugins?

gRPC plugins are extensions that run as separate processes and communicate with the Cosmo Router over Google's Remote Procedure Call ([gRPC](https://grpc.io/)) protocol.

Running as separate processes provides critical fault isolation - if a plugin crashes or encounters a fatal error, it won't bring down your router process.

gRPC plugins implement the GraphQL resolvers while providing:

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Higher Performance" icon="bolt">
    Reduce network hops by running resolvers inter-process with the router
  </Card>
  <Card title="Lower Latency" icon="gauge-high">
    Reduce end-to-end request time with direct resolver calls
  </Card>
  <Card title="Resource Efficiency" icon="server">
    Reduce infrastructure costs by consolidating services
  </Card>
  <Card title="Clean Architecture" icon="diagram-project">
    Maintain separation of concerns with modular plugin design
  </Card>

> </CardGroup>

Reviewer 2: 2 of these both read "lower latency" essentially, also not sure what "running resolvers inter-process with the router" means

  </Card>
</CardGroup>

### Benefits Over Traditional Subgraphs

When compared to traditional standalone subgraphs, gRPC plugins offer substantial technical advantages:

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Reduced Latency" icon="gauge-high">
    Eliminates network round-trips between the router and subgraph for faster query execution
  </Card>
  <Card title="Simplified Deployment" icon="cloud-arrow-up">
    Fewer moving parts means simpler deployments and maintenance with all subgraphs running in the router process
  </Card>
  <Card title="Reduced Infrastructure Costs" icon="dollar-sign">
    Consolidate services to reduce overall resource consumption and operational complexity
  </Card>
  <Card title="Direct API Bridging" icon="bridge">
    Easily connect legacy REST APIs, databases, and other services to your graph without building standalone GraphQL services
  </Card>

> </CardGroup>

Reviewer 2: This reads nearly identical to the above set of 4 cards describing advantages of gRPC subgraphs, perhaps consolidate?

This architecture gives you a unified development experience with consistent tooling across all your subgraphs while enabling seamless integration with your existing infrastructure.

## How It Works

The gRPC plugin architecture works by:

1. **Plugin Registration**: Plugins are registered with the Cosmo Router at startup
2. **Schema Integration**: The plugin's schema is integrated into the federated graph
3. **Request Handling**: When the router receives a GraphQL request, it routes relevant parts to the appropriate plugins
4. **Inter-Process Communication**: Plugins run in separate processes and communicate with the router via gRPC
5. **Response Assembly**: The router assembles the complete response from all plugins and regular subgraphs

## Use Cases

gRPC plugins are ideal for:

- **Legacy API Integration**: Wrap existing REST, SOAP, or other APIs behind GraphQL types
- **Performance-Critical Paths**: Implement frequently accessed resolvers with minimal overhead
- **Simplified Architecture**: Reduce the number of services in your deployment

> - **Resource Optimization**: Reduce cloud costs by consolidating services

Reviewer 2: This duplicates the cards above, point for point

Author: Good point, I also had a hard time to distinguish them.
